---
title: "CodeBook"
output: html_document
---

ORIGINAL DATA SET

The original data set, "Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Version 1.0", was generated by Anguita et al. (2012) and is hosted in the UCI Machine Learning Repository (Bache and Lichman, 2013). The data set contains 561 feature variables related to the accelerometer and gyroscope signals from Samsung Galaxy S II smartphones worn by experimental subjects while performing activities. There were 30 experimental subjects, who each performed 6 different activities: walking, walking upstairs, walking downstairs, sitting, standing, and laying. 

The experimental data was randomly divided into a training file, "train/X_train.txt" and a test file, "test/X_test.txt". Labels are provided in separate files. Names of feature variable columns are in the "features.txt" file. Activity labels for each observation (row) in the train and test data are in the "train/y_train.txt" and "test/y_test.txt" files respectively. Labels identifying which subject performed the activity for each observation (row) in the train and test data are in the "train/subject_train.txt" and "test/subject_train.txt" files respectively.


DATA CLEANING AND TRANSFORMATIONS TO YIELD THE TIDY DATA SET

The "run_analysis.R" script will yield the tidy data set "tidy_dataset.txt" provided that the original unzipped data set is in the user's working directory. 

The script will load each data table file into R. The train data table and test data table will each be merged with its corresponding activity labels table and subject labels table. The resulting labeled train and test data tables will be merged together into one table and will then be given appropriate column names. The "subject" and "activity" columns and columns containing mean and standard deviation data will be extracted. The codes in the "activity" column will be replaced with the names of the corresponding activities, i.e. 1 = "WALKING", 2 = "WALKING_UPSTAIRS", 3 = "WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS", 4 = "SITTING", 5 = "STANDING", 6 = "LAYING". The data set will be arranged by subject, and then by activity. Then the data set will be grouped by subject and activity. Each of the feature variable columns will be summarized by calculating the mean for each subject/activity group. The tidy data set will then be saved as a data table.


LIST OF VARIABLES IN THE TIDY DATA SET

Variables 3 to 68 in the tidy data set are feature variable value **averages** for each subject and activity combination. The names of the feature variables have not been altered from the original data set (Anguita et al., 2012). Each variable is listed with its column number.

1 "subject"
2 "activity"
3 "tBodyAcc-mean()-X"  
4 "tBodyAcc-mean()-Y"
5 "tBodyAcc-mean()-Z"
6 "tBodyAcc-std()-X"
7 "tBodyAcc-std()-Y"
8 "tBodyAcc-std()-Z"	
9 "tGravityAcc-mean()-X"	
10 "tGravityAcc-mean()-Y"	
11 "tGravityAcc-mean()-Z"	
12 "tGravityAcc-std()-X"	
13 "tGravityAcc-std()-Y"	
14 "tGravityAcc-std()-Z"	
15 "tBodyAccJerk-mean()-X"	
16 "tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y"	
17 "tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z"	
18 "tBodyAccJerk-std()-X"	
19 "tBodyAccJerk-std()-Y"	
20 "tBodyAccJerk-std()-Z"	
21 "tBodyGyro-mean()-X"	
22 "tBodyGyro-mean()-Y"	
23 "tBodyGyro-mean()-Z"	
24 "tBodyGyro-std()-X"	
25 "tBodyGyro-std()-Y"	
26 "tBodyGyro-std()-Z"	
27 "tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-X"
28 "tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Y"	
29 "tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Z"
30 "tBodyGyroJerk-std()-X"	
31 "tBodyGyroJerk-std()-Y"	
32 "tBodyGyroJerk-std()-Z"	
33 "tBodyAccMag-mean()"	
34 "tBodyAccMag-std()"	
35 "tGravityAccMag-mean()"	
36 "tGravityAccMag-std()"	
37 "tBodyAccJerkMag-mean()"	
38 "tBodyAccJerkMag-std()"	
39 "tBodyGyroMag-mean()"	
40 "tBodyGyroMag-std()"	
41 "tBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()"	
42 "tBodyGyroJerkMag-std()"
43 "fBodyAcc-mean()-X"	
44 "fBodyAcc-mean()-Y"	
45 "fBodyAcc-mean()-Z"	
46 "fBodyAcc-std()-X"	
47 "fBodyAcc-std()-Y"	
48 "fBodyAcc-std()-Z"	
49 "fBodyAccJerk-mean()-X"	
50 "fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y"	
51 "fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z"
52 "fBodyAccJerk-std()-X"
53 "fBodyAccJerk-std()-Y"
54 "fBodyAccJerk-std()-Z"	
55 "fBodyGyro-mean()-X"	
56 "fBodyGyro-mean()-Y"	
57 "fBodyGyro-mean()-Z"	
58 "fBodyGyro-std()-X"	
59 "fBodyGyro-std()-Y"	
60 "fBodyGyro-std()-Z"	
61 "fBodyAccMag-mean()"	
62 "fBodyAccMag-std()"	
63 "fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-mean()"
64 "fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-std()"	
65 "fBodyBodyGyroMag-mean()"	
66 "fBodyBodyGyroMag-std()"	
67 "fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()"	
68 "fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-std()"


REFERENCES

Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012

Bache, K. & Lichman, M. (2013). UCI Machine Learning Repository [http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml]. Irvine, CA: University of California, School of Information and Computer Science. 